Add developer getting started guide (#2837)
inmanta/inmanta-core: docs/platform_developers/developer_getting_started.rst

********************************
Developer Getting Started Guide
********************************

This page describes how to setup your development environment to:

* Install VS Code and Inmanta extension.
* Setting up Python virtual environments.
* Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project.
* Set project sources
* Module developers guide

Install VS Code and Inmanta extension
#######################################

This step does not need any additional information but if you need some help, you can always ask a colleague.

In order to install VS Code, you can refer to `this <https://code.visualstudio.com/learn/get-started/basics>`_ page.

> Further information about Inmanta VS Code extension is available on `this <https://github.com/inmanta/vscode-inmanta>`_ page.

Author: Done

Setting up Python virtual environments
########################################

Python virtual environments have to be created using ``venv`` by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python3 -m venv ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>

Then activated by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    source ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>/bin/activate

**Upgrading your ``pip`` will save you a lot of time and troubleshooting (due to changes in the pip resolver in version 20 and 21).** you can do so by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    pip install --upgrade pip

> Usually the projects that you will work on, come with ``requirements.txt`` or ``requirements.dev.txt`` to install the required modules, if not, it is a good idea to ``pip install``:

Reviewer: About the packages, two remarks:

1. I would split this into two very clear parts: 
   1. if you work from an existing project then these commands
   2. otherwise, these commands 
2. because of that, I would move to after the project install part of the guide.

1. inmanta-core
2. pytest
3. pytest-inmanta

> 4. pytest-inmanta-* (Additional pytest fixtures exist for working with yang and lsm, but are only useful when these are used in your project or module.)

Author: Done

Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project
##################################################################

> At the time of this writing, linting and code navigation in IDEs work only if you have a project, so if you want to work on a single module, you still need to have a project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of this writing, linting and code navigation in IDEs work only if you have a project, so even if you only work on a single module, it is best to have a project.
```

There are two things that can be done:

> 1. Either there is already a project and you ``git clone`` your module there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Either there is already a project that you can ``git clone``
```

2. Make a project.

> Steps to create a project are mentioned `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/configurationmodel.html>`_ for further reading.

Reviewer: I would put the cookie cutter instructions here as well.

Author: Done

Once you are done with creating a project, you can ``cd`` into that directory and open vs code by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    code .

Upon opening your vs code, and the ``main.cf`` file, you should see modules downloading in ``libs`` directory.

Set project sources
#####################

> The next step is to set the sources of your project so that it knows, where to get its required modules from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to set the sources of your project so that it knows, where to get its required modules from.
If you only use opensource modules as provided by Inmanta, you can skip this step. 
```

1. Find the module you want to work on
2. Copy the SSH URL of the repo
3. In your vs code, open the ``project.yml`` file and under ``repo:``, add the copied line there but keep in mind to replace the name of a specific module with a place holder, like below example:

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/my_module.git

To:

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/{}.git

> Now, in your ``main.cf`` file, if you import a module like, ``import nokia_service_vprn`` and save the file, you can get code completion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, in your ``main.cf`` file, if you import a module like, ``import my_module`` and save the file, you can get code completion.
```

> Now, in your ``main.cf`` file, if you import a module like, ``import nokia_service_vprn`` and save the file, you can get code completion.

Reviewer: I would make this a separate sub-title, as the one before is optional

**Please note, code completion and navigation work on modules that are imported in the ``main.cf`` file**

> Module developers guide

Reviewer: I would add the option here: when starting a new module, this, otherwise that.

Author: Done

********************************
Developer Getting Started Guide
********************************

This page describes how to setup your development environment to:

> * Setup Inmanta pip artifacts

Reviewer: The first two steps are only relevant for employees. Perhaps this has to be split or moved to the internal docs entirely. 

@bartv wdyt?

Reviewer 2: agreed

Reviewer: (bart means: yes, split)

Author: yes. I understood this part. 
I assumed this was to be used internally. As I see now, Gitlab is our private/internal stash? If so, could you please let me know where this doc exactly has to land?

Reviewer: so the internal part should go into here: https://code.inmanta.com/inmanta/developerdocs (and refer to the public docs for the common part)

* Verify that you already have GitLab SSH keys.
* Install VS Code and Inmanta extension.
* Setting up Python virtual environments.
* Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project.
* Set project sources
* Module developers guide

Setup Inmanta pip artifacts
#############################

In order to use Inmanta's internal pip artifacts:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir   ~/.config/pip

    nano ~/.config/pip/pip.conf

And below text into your ``pip.conf`` file:

::
    [global]
    index_url=https://artifacts.internal.inmanta.com/inmanta/dev

Verify that you already setup GitLab SSH keys
###############################################

The steps to add SSH keys have already been mentioned in ``Inmanta Getting Started Guide`` which was emailed to you.
You can click `here <https://internal.inmanta.com/topics/starting.html>`_ to read it again.

In order to verify that it is working correctly, run below command:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    ssh git@git.inmanta.com

You should see your name in the response.

Install VS Code and Inmanta extension
#######################################

> This step does not need any additional information but if you need some help, you can always ask a colleague.

Reviewer: This goes into the public documentation,...

Reviewer 2: I would link here to the vscode documentation and the documentation in the vs code extension

Author: Could you please provide the links to those docs?

Reviewer: https://github.com/inmanta/vscode-inmanta

Reviewer: and for the docs of vscode itself, google is your friend ;-)

Author: yes, I meant our own doc  👍🏻 
Thanks

Setting up Python virtual environments
########################################

Python virtual environments have to be created using ``venv`` by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python3 -m venv ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>

Then activated by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    source ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>/bin/activate

> **Upgrading your ``pip`` will save you a lot of time and troubleshooting.** you can do so by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Upgrading your ``pip`` will save you a lot of time and troubleshooting (due to changes in the pip resolver in version 20 and 21).** you can do so by running:
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    pip install --upgrade pip

Usually the projects that you will work on, come with ``requirements.txt`` or ``requirements.dev.txt`` to install the required modules, if not, it is a good idea to ``pip install``:

1. inmanta-core
2. pytest
3. pytest-inmanta

> 4. pytest-inmanta-yang

Reviewer: pytest-inmanta-yang is not relevant for 99% of people

> 4. pytest-inmanta-yang

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. pytest-inmanta-* (Additional pytest fixtures exist for working with yang and lsm, but are only useful when these are used in your project or module.)
```

Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project
##################################################################

At the time of this writing, linting and code navigation in IDEs work only if you have a project, so if you want to work on a single module, you still need to have a project.

There are two things that can be done:

1. Either there is already a project and you ``git clone`` your module there.
2. Make a project.

Steps to create a project are mentioned `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/configurationmodel.html>`_ for further reading.

Once you are done with creating a project, you can ``cd`` into that directory and open vs code by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    code .

Upon opening your vs code, and the ``main.cf`` file, you should see modules downloading in ``libs`` directory.

Set project sources
#####################

The next step is to set the sources of your project so that it knows, where to get its required modules from.

> 1. Locate the project/module that you want to work on from Gitlab.

Reviewer: no relevant for most people, for internal docs only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Find the module you want to work on
```

> 2. Copy the SSH URL by clicking on the ``CLONE`` button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Copy the SSH URL of the repo
```

********************************
Developer Getting Started Guide
********************************

This guide explains how to set up the recommended developer setup on a Linux machine. 
Other development setups are possible, but this one provides a good starting point.

* Install VS Code and Inmanta extension.
* Setting up Python virtual environments.
* Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project.
* Set project sources
* Module developers guide

**The examples below are using ``pip`` your system might require you to use ``pip3``**.

Install VS Code and Inmanta extension
#######################################

The developer setup is based on VSCode with the Inmanta extension.

In order to install VS Code, you can refer to `this <https://code.visualstudio.com/learn/get-started/basics>`_ page.

Inmanta's extension in VS Code marketplace can be found `here <https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=inmanta.inmanta>`_. 

Further information about Inmanta VS Code extension is available on `this <https://github.com/inmanta/vscode-inmanta>`_ page.

Setting up Python virtual environments
########################################

> For every project that you work on, we recommend using a new virtual environment. In Python ``venv``s are used to create virtual environments. If you need a refresher, you can check out `this <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_ page.

Reviewer: > In Python ``venv``s are used to create virtual environments 

sounds like a tautology

Author: Removed it

> Below example shows you how to create a virtual environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a virtual environment:
```

.. code-block:: bash
    

>     python3 -m venv ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>

Reviewer: it would improve copy-paste-ability if you gave it a actual name

```suggestion
    python3 -m venv ~/.virtualenvs/my_project
```

Then activate it by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    

>     source ~/.virtualenvs/<env_name>/bin/activate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    source ~/.virtualenvs/my_project/bin/activate
```

**Upgrading your ``pip`` will save you a lot of time and troubleshooting (due to changes in the pip resolver in version 20 and 21).** you can do so by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    pip install --upgrade pip

Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project
##################################################################

At the time of this writing, linting and code navigation in IDEs work only if you have a project, so even if you only work on a single module, it is best to have a project.

There are two scenarios:

> 1. There is already an existing project that you can ``git clone``.

Reviewer: I would make a subtitle for each case and link to them from here.

Author: Done

2. Make a new project.

Steps to create a project are mentioned `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/configurationmodel.html>`_ for further reading.

> ``cookiecutter`` can be used to create projects in an easier and convenient fashion. It could be utilized like:

Reviewer: I would put the example first: 
```
to create a new project: 

(code block)

For more details, go here. 

```

Author: Done

Set project sources
#####################

When starting a new project, the next step is to set the sources of your project so that it knows, where to get its required modules from. Otherwise, you can skip this step and just ``import`` your desired modules.

If you only use opensource modules as provided by Inmanta, you can skip below step. 

1. Find the module you want to work on
2. Copy the SSH URL of the repo
3. In your VS code, open the ``project.yml`` file and under ``repo:``, add the copied line there but keep in mind to replace the name of a specific module with a place holder, like below example:

.. code-block:: bash

    code project.yml

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/my_module.git

Becomes:

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/{}.git

* Now, in your ``main.cf`` file, if you import a module like, ``import <my_module>`` and save the file, you can get code completion. If you are working on an exisitng project with a populated ``main.``cf file, code completion will work as expected.

**Please note, code completion and navigation work on modules that are imported in the ``main.cf`` file**.

> Module developers guide

Reviewer: I would add a section to clone or create a module, similar to the one about the project.

Author: Done

Reviewer: Best to also maintain the split between existing module and new module

#########################

When starting to work on a new module, it is recommended to check the ``readme.md`` file to see the instructions on how to install and use them. There is also a guide `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/modules.html>`_ that helps you get up and running.

It is also recommended to set the ``INMANTA_TEST_ENV`` environment variable to speed up your tests and avoid creating virtual environments at each test run. It can be set to something like:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    mkdir /tmp/env
    source INMANTA_TEST_ENV=/tmp/env

> There are multiple ways to set environment variables:

Reviewer: I would only explain one way.

Author: ok

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python3 -m venv ~/.virtualenvs/my_project

Then activate it by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    source ~/.virtualenvs/my_project/bin/activate

**Upgrading your ``pip`` will save you a lot of time and troubleshooting (due to changes in the pip resolver in version 20 and 21).** 

You can do so by running:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    pip install --upgrade pip

Benefit from linting and code navigation by setting up a project
##################################################################

At the time of this writing, linting and code navigation in IDEs work only if you have a project, so even if you only work on a single module, it is best to have a project.

There are two scenarios:

1. Working on a new project :ref:`Working on a New Project`.
2. Working on an existing project :ref:`Working on an Existing Project`.

Working on a New Project
========================

To create a new project: 

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install cookiecutter

    cookiecutter https://github.com/inmanta/inmanta-project-template.git

For more details go `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/configurationmodel.html>`_.

> ``cookiecutter`` is used to create projects in an easier and more convenient fashion.

Reviewer: remove 80-82 as there is already a ref to the docs above.

Author: Done

1. Find the module you want to work on
2. Copy the SSH URL of the repo
3. In your VS code, open the ``project.yml`` file and under ``repo:``, add the copied line there but keep in mind to replace the name of a specific module with a place holder, like below example:

.. code-block:: bash

    code project.yml

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/my_module.git

Becomes:

.. code-block:: yaml
    
    repo:
        - git@code.inmanta.com:example/{}.git

* Now, in your ``main.cf`` file, if you import a module like, ``import <my_module>`` and save the file, you can get code completion. If you are working on an exisitng project with a populated ``main.``cf file, code completion will work as expected.

**Please note, code completion and navigation work on modules that are imported in the ``main.cf`` file**.

Module developers guide
#########################

Like projects, there are also two scenarios:

1. Working on a new module :ref:`Working on a New Module`.
2. Working on an existing module :ref:`Working on an Existing Module`.

Working on a New Module
=======================

> There is a guide `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/modules.html>`_ that helps you get up and running.

Reviewer: you refer to this guide above and below the example, I would structure this consistent to the new projects part.

Same as :ref:`Working on a New Project` part, modules can also be created like:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install cookiecutter

    cookiecutter https://github.com/inmanta/inmanta-module-template.git

For more details go `here <https://github.com/inmanta/inmanta-module-template>`_ and `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/dev/model_developers/modules.html>`_.

Working on an Existing Module
=============================

> When starting to work on an existing module, it is recommended to check the ``readme.md`` file that comes with the module to see the instructions on how to install and use them. There is also a guide `here <https://docs.inmanta.com/community/latest/model_developers/modules.html>`_ that is useful in case you skipped the previous part.

Reviewer: Explain how to add an import statement to the `main.cf`, then run inmanta compile to download the module.

Required Environment Variables
##############################

> There are a few environment variables that are required whenever you need to do unit tests to indicate the device, port, username and password, etc. which are mentioned here.

Reviewer: I would remove line 190, it is a bit vague, referring people to readme.md (as above) is preferable)

> It is also *recommended* to set the ``INMANTA_TEST_ENV`` environment variable to speed up your tests and avoid creating virtual environments at each test run. It can be set to something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is *recommended* to set the ``INMANTA_TEST_ENV`` environment variable to speed up your tests and avoid creating virtual environments at each test run. It can be set to something like:
```

1. Create the required TEST directories:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir -p /tmp/env
    mkdir -p /tmp/WORKSPACE

2. Export below entries based on your setup:

.. code-block:: bash

>     export YANG_DEVICE_HOST="device_IP"

Reviewer: remove the YANG and WORKSPACE stuff, not relevant here.
